Today's
date is the 22nd of September, 1982. This is Terry
Anderson. This is a test. Today is the 22nd of
September, 1982. I'm here with Dr. Fred Morrow,
and we're going to talk about his background to
begin with. Tell me about your background, where
you're from, your parents, Early life? Well, I was
born in Moscow, Idaho, May 4, 1909.
When I was about two years old, we moved to Montana
where my dad had a homestead. We stayed there as
homesteaders for just a couple of years and then
back to the state of Washington. where we lived in
Molson, Washington, and
Spokane, Washington, and back to Moscow, Idaho,
where I went to school, to grade school, high
school, and to the University of Idaho. I finished
University of Idaho with a degree in business
administration,
and Because that was at a time when there was a
national depression, we- 1934. 1934, we went and
moved to Pullman, Washington, where I went to the
College of Veterinary Medicine, got a degree in
veterinary medicine. Is that the main reason that
you went to veterinary medicine? That's right,
the main reason. You were thinking you wanted to be
a businessman first then? I wanted to get a job. It
was a tough time, and my primary concern was to get
into a field where there was an opportunity for a
job, and veterinary medicine was one of the few
fields where there was jobs open. And that was the
only reason I went to college veterinary
medicine. What about your prerequisites? Well, I
had taken care of those pretty well, because
initially I was going to be a dentist before I...
Oh, I see. So I had taken some pre-med along with...
business administration degree that I got at the
University of Idaho. So then I finished the vet
school in 37 and took a job with the US Department of
Agriculture for just a few months and then had a
better opportunity with the University of Idaho
to become an assistant professor there in their
microbiology department. I stayed there about a
year and a half and then had an opportunity for a
fellowship at Cornell to get a PhD. So I went to
Cornell and had a fellowship and worked on my PhD
until 1941
when I got pulled in the Army. Fortunately I was in
the Reserve. So I then served in the Army and until
1964 for 23 years. No kidding, as a reserve officer
on active duty during the war and reserve during
peacetime. And then after about 1943
or 44, I got shifted into the regular army, applied
and became a regular army officer about 1933. I
mean, by 1944. And I stayed on through 1964.
And all of my assignments in the military were in
research, fortunately. And the Army also gave me a
year off to go back to, actually, to Rockefeller
Foundation in New York City, where I finished my
PhD. Oh, so you hadn't completed it. I hadn't
completed it when I was at Cornell. They put me in
the service before I got it finished. Let's stop
right here for a second. So you finished a Ph.D.
then in 1948. Yes, that's right, even though I had
started it in 1940, in 1937 actually. But because
of those several years of interruption with the
military, it wasn't completed until 48. Where did
they send you in the military during the Second
World War?
Well, fortunately, I was initially assigned to a
research lab at Front Royal, Virginia, from 41 to
42, and then to a gross eel in Canada, which was a
foreign disease control station. There was a
threat of biological warfare under this
hemisphere at that time, so there we studied
foreign diseases, rinderpest and similar
foreign diseases. Then in 1945, to evaluate the
vaccine we had developed at Grosse Ile, one other
fellow and I went to Kenya in East Africa to test the
vaccine in the field that we had prepared against
rinderpest in Canada. And it worked just fine, but
this experience of working in Canada and East
Africa got me indoctrinated into the great need on
a worldwide basis for control of foreign animal
diseases of food producing livestock.
And so then when I came back from Africa in 54, I
managed an assignment with the Armed Forces of
Sina.
1954. 1954. I don't want to get these dates mixed up
with that. Chief of the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology Research Committee? Yeah, I went back
to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in 64. I
mean, sorry, 54.
And was there in the research laboratory working
on vaccines for equine encephalomyelitis and for
Jap B encephalitis and things of that sort until
when I had an opportunity to go back to Africa.
I'm getting these dates wrong. Oh, in 1951 then you
were field director of a research team in Africa,
that's right. Yes, that's right. What happened
was that in 1945 I went from Canada to Africa to test
a vaccine then when I came back from there I was
assigned to Walter Reed Laboratories from 45 to 51
and then I went back to Africa 51 to 54 and then was
assigned to the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology where I stayed until 1961 during that
time I was, as it says there, in charge of first
biology, laboratories, and then later the
Department of Pathology also. And was promoted to
colonel during that time period. And then went to
Fort Knox, Kentucky, where I was in charge of the
pathology department. But all of this was in some
relationship to animal disease research. And
then upon retirement from the Army in 64, I
accepted the job here as Associate Dean for
Research at the College of Veterinary Medicine
with the intent and statement that I wanted to
establish a program here in Tropical Veterinary
Medicine because of my earnest interest in this
field. Now why did you retire from the Army? When I
became a regular army officer in about 44, they
gave me credit for seven years based on age so that
my 30 years was up in 1964. So I had a 30-year
military retirement in 64. That's why I left, even
though I was a long ways from 60. I hadn't reached. I
can't think just at the second how old I was at the
time, but that's incidental. Fifty-six?
Fifty-six, yeah. Well, then I came here and served
as associate dean. Now, did you have other offers
when you retired from the Army? Yes, yeah. There
were lots of opportunities at that time. But the
main reason I came here was because of the
opportunity to work in tropical veterinary
medicine as well as to serve as associate dean.
Sure. Because of the Texas location close to the
Mexican border, it was an ideal place to work on
tropical diseases, you see. It was a prime reason I
came here. Yes, there were several other
opportunities at the time. Mostly in vet schools?
Oh, yes, in vet schools at Warson State and in
California and different places where there were
opportunities. But they promised you when you
came here that you'd be able to work on tropical
diseases. Well, they, at least Dean Price, was
encouraging that this was a possibility, and then
after I had been here about a year and gotten
settled down into working as associate dean for
research,
we developed a proposal for a program in the
Institute of Tropical Veterinary Medicine,
which was approved by the dean and by President
Rudder and fortunately the administrative setup
was such that when President Rudder gave us the
okay we were free to go out and seek funds and
develop the program here which we then did in 1965
and 66
and we obtained funds initially from the
Rockefeller Foundation Now how'd you get that, by
writing a grant proposal? Yes, writing a grant
proposal and through interviews with the
concerned people. And fortunately, the
Rockefeller Foundation was already active with a
program in Columbia in South America, so it wasn't
difficult for us to integrate into that program
with research that could be conducted there that
could not be conducted in Texas.
So that's why we have this Colombian connection
now. That's right. Because I was wondering why you
went with Colombia and not with Mexico or
someplace closer. Well, there had been some
contacts and some interviews and some work done
with Mexico, but it was because of the Rockefeller
Foundation collaboration with a Colombian
project at SEAT, their Center for International
Tropical Agriculture, that we first became
involved in their laboratory in Bogota,
Colombia. And we had our own lab then in Bogota for
about two years. And then our activities were
moved to SEAT in Colombia to down near
Cali, Columbia.
And there for then, for the following period of
about 10 years, we had an active program in Cali
with six or eight faculty people from here in
Columbia, as well as the staff here at Texas A&M.
And those things are our parents from the papers
that I have given you, the details on that. Okay.
And then- So this is in 1966 when you proposed for
development, and when did you get the grant? Well,
right away. We got it in 66. We started the program
in 66. Okay, you also had a research proposal to the
United States AID. Yes, and it was funded- In 67,
yeah. And then in about 68 or 69, I'm not sure
exactly which now, we got a separate second
funding from USAID for the so-called 211D
program, which permitted us to work in Guyana,
South America, as well as in Columbia. So we had
some research going on in Guyana as well as in
Columbia, South America for some time. Now, when
you originally made these proposals, did you have
specific diseases or specific areas that you
wanted to work? Yes, we did. What were those ideas
and how did that change? We were primarily
concerned with hemoprotozoal diseases,
Babesia, Anaplasma, because those are major
handicaps to livestock production, cattle
production particularly, in Latin America, also
because the so-called Texas fever that once was a
major problem here was still prevalent in Latin
American countries. That disease had once cost
the United States about $40 million a year. And we
knew that to eradicate it in Latin American
countries would increase their productivity
considerably. It would also provide a major
opportunity for Canadian livestock producers to
be able to ship, I'm sorry, I mean Texas livestock
producers to be able to ship Texas cattle to Latin
America to improve their breeding stock and
greatly enhance the market for Texas cattle
abroad. And we later, after we had done quite a bit
of research in developing means of immunizing
against Babesia, we did send some herds from Texas
to Latin America, which got along just fine and
stayed healthy down there and improved local
livestock breed. Great. And what countries in
Latin America? Well, we sent some to some Central
American countries and also some herds to
Columbia. How'd you pick these cattle? Where'd
you get these cattle from? Well, they were Texas
breeders that had high quality cattle that wanted
to sell them in Latin America for a good price. And
they were able to do that, you see, some breeding
cows and bulls and so on. And because of the success
of those efforts, we received offers for and grant
funds from African countries that also would like
very much to improve their breeds of cattle in
Africa if they could be immunized against these
same diseases which are prevalent over there. In
fact, we had a ten million dollar offer from
Nigeria. They were going to provide the money and
they have enough oil money there now that they
could afford to do that. Did they? No, they didn't
because By that time, which was in the late 70s or
mid-70s,
there had been administrative changes at the
university higher than the College of Veterinary
Medicine. OK, well, we'll get to those. But let's
get back then to the early 1960s. In other words, it
seems to me that, and correct me if I'm wrong, but it
seems to me that there were not only medical
reasons and research reasons to go and set up the
institute, but also economic reasons? Is that
true? Yes, you bet. That was a major consideration
because there's no question but what the world in
general is in desperate need of more food
resources. And the cattle, for example, food
producing livestock in many countries are
greatly handicapped by disease. So to eliminate
disease problems would increase their
productivity and make them more self-sufficient
countries. And even in the early, late 60s and 70s,
there was at that time many countries of the world
where people were starving. And matter of fact,
there's some 15,000 people starving to death
every year at that time. and about one eighth of the
world's population going to be hungry every
night. So there was a desperate need to increase
world food production. And that was the basis
primarily of our incentive, plus the fact that to
do something about improving the health
environment for livestock abroad, they could
improve their livestock and make them more
productive. and provide a tremendous market for
the United States to export better breeding
stock, which we have. For example,
one American dairy cow will produce as much milk as
ten African cows. No kidding. And one American
steer will produce as much beef as about six of
theirs. Those animals in Africa for the most part
are terribly stunted for lack of disease control,
lack of adequate nutrition, lack of water, and
breeding. Because for centuries, they have been
geared to survival, not to productivity. While
our animals have been fed well and well cared for
and properly bred and increased for
productivity. So there's a tremendous need and
opportunity to improve livestock abroad, and
that Those two things are the key factors that
stimulated our efforts in this direction. And
because of world population, now the need for
increased food production is greater today than
it was 15, 20 years ago. Now, during the 1960s, when
your institute is beginning to get steam, there is
a tremendous shift in American history and in
society toward are with people who are much more
interested in the world. LBJ at this time comes out
and starts talking about overpopulation of the
earth. We start sending birth control pills and
stuff like that to India. It's been foreign aid the
first time we've ever done that. Did any of this
have any impact whatsoever on the institute?
Well, yes. All of those things which have a bearing
on population control are important factors in
relation to world need for food, but there has
persisted since the early 60s a growing need for
food on a worldwide basis because of increases in
population. It's somewhat of a tragedy that the
scientific developments which have controlled
disease and increased longevity of man have
also had such an effect on population that they
have increased population to the point where food
supplies cannot increase as fast as population
has. See, in 1600, it took a thousand years for
population to double. Today, world population is
doubling every 30 years. And in Salvador, for
example, every 21 years. In Kenya, every 28 years.
with population increasing so much more rapidly
than food supplies possibly can there's bound to
be desperate starvation
or war will wipe them out as an alternative okay
let's talk about some of the specific research
some of the other specific research programs that
you had at the institute
well we were primarily concerned with these
hemoprotozole diseases. Now this was done from
the standpoint of trying to develop vaccines but
also a medicinal means of controlling those
diseases. We also received some small grants from
drug manufacturers in the United States that
wanted us to evaluate drugs that could be used to
help with the control of these same diseases. No
kidding. So we had Funds from three sources
really, from Rockefeller, from Aid, and from some
commercial sources.
Did you have any breakthroughs? What did you
consider your successes? Well, the major
successes were in providing a means of immunizing
against Babesia. And also methods for the
treatment of anaplasmosis. Both of these were
definitely improved and were far better because
of our experience with them than they had been
before. To my knowledge, we were the first people
that were ever able to export immunized cattle
from Texas to Latin America and have them survive
down there. And also, large studies conducted in
Columbia, we were able to immunize young animals
and then let them run in the field where they were
fully exposed and they resisted the disease and
remained healthy, you see, and were far more
productive with very minimal losses compared to
native cattle. Could you give me some statistics?
I mean, how larger did the cattle get? How much
longer did they live in general? How much more
productive were they? Did you do any surveys as far
as that was concerned? Yes, and I'm sure that that
there is ample evidence within the papers that are
published papers which are in this collection
here that will give you that information. And
there was definite progress because well for one
thing you couldn't import cattle before and have
them survive. Eighty percent of them would die. No
kidding. Eighty percent? That's right. They just
can't stand those diseases down there where
there's tremendous tick populations that carry
the disease. And if they come in as susceptible
adults, they just don't last long. Almost all of
them die. But when they're immunized as young
animals, then they get along all right. Are the
animals still there? Yes. Yeah, they're still
doing fine. And have you heard anything over the
last year or so about that? Well, you see, once
immunity is established, then exposure to the
disease by infected ticks only stimulates their
increased immunity. So if they get through that
early period of when they're no longer
susceptible, they become increasingly
resistant. So they'll live as long as any other
cattle. Now, did you hear, I mean, were there...
projects that you thought you could make some
headway but turned out that they were not
successful?
Well, all of these things you go through growing
stages of constant improvement until you get it
the best you can, you know. So I'm sure that in our
early trials down there we weren't as successful
as we were in later ones because one has to learn how
to do these things and do them right. But were there
things that you thought that you failed at?
No, I don't really think so because the method of
immunization that we used in Latin America and
here is called pre-immunization. It's a matter of
developing a strain of the organism which is mild
from the standpoint of producing disease but
still produces a good solid immunity. In other
words, you give them a little bug and then let the
natural forces take over. That's right. was to
develop a strain of organisms that could be used in
young, fully susceptible cattle that would not
produce disease in terms of any clinical signs,
but would develop a strong immunity that was
lifelong lasting. And it was certainly
maintained even better when they were later
exposed to the fully virulent field strains of the
disease. so it turned out very well now sure there
were trial and errors in the beginning in
developing this strain to the point where it was
safe to use and where it would produce good
immunity and sometimes we use some of these
medicinal agents along with the early
inoculation to get them through that first stage
and keep them healthy while they developed
immunity but later we didn't even have to do that So
it's a growing trial and error process. Is the
vital time the first six months or a year? Well the
first six or eight weeks is a critical time until
they get through the possibility of developing
clinical illness and become immune. Now are there
differences between treating the animals or
giving the vaccination to animals who are down in
the country versus giving them to American cattle
and then shipping them down?
The main difference is that indigenous cattle
produce calves which have some level of immunity
because they get it from the colostrum of their
mother. So they're a little better to start with
than the fully susceptible cattle here. But in
either case, they can be immunized properly. Now
let's talk a little bit about the relationships
that you had with the state and federal
government. You must have had some contact. The
Institute must have had contact with the state
government and the federal government. Well,
that's right. We did. We met frequently with the
USAID in Washington because they were funding our
project. We met with the USDA numerous times
because They were sincerely interested in our
activities. As a matter of fact, some of our former
staff are now working on a USDA project in the state
of Washington to carry on the same work that we were
doing here. I was going to ask about that. Dr.
Cutler, who was a principal research man for us in
this program, is now heading a laboratory in
Washington State with branches in Idaho, and just
doing the same work and continuing on with it. Were
there other colleges that had, at the time when you
set up the institute, were there other colleges in
the country? Was there any other vet school that
you knew of that was doing tropical diseases? This
was the first program in tropical veterinary
medicine, to my knowledge, in the United States.
No kidding. Now there were some individual
professors in a couple of places that had some
interest, but this was the first program with a
sizable staff. And that's another question I
have. What was the size of the staff? How did it
grow? How did it change? Well, it grew from one or
two of us to where we had,
well, the details are in some of this write-up that
I have given you, but we typically had about six
staff members from Texas A&M who were professors
and assistant professors, and then probably 15 or
20 technicians, and usually half a dozen graduate
students, many of whom were foreign graduate
students from Latin America and Europe and even
Africa, people that were sent here to learn more
about this program so they could help when they got
home. So between the Columbian program, the
Guyana program, and Texas, we probably had
ordinarily eight or ten staff members and about
twenty technicians plus graduate students.
Okay, let's get back to the relationships that you
had with the federal government. Did, in what, I
mean were there Of course, this program could have
implications for the State Department and for
foreign policy. Did you have any relations with
the State Department? Was there any time that they
came out and they said, well, we don't want you to-
If you would like to look at the CV there with the
consultant group and the committees,
there was lots of interest.
See, I was involved with the US Livestock Sanitary
Association on their foreign animal disease
committee on their infectious diseases of
horses. And during that same time period, I was on
the research committee of the American
Veterinary Medical Association and chairman of
that committee for several years. And also, many
of these foreign trips were sponsored by agencies
other than USAID or Rockefeller. There were
several of them sponsored by National Academy of
Science that were interested in these things. And
for example...